research chemist and head of the Texas
Engineering Experiment Station Food Protein
Division. Today's date is August 4th, 1981. Let's
begin, Dr. Lucis, by your telling us something
about your early years, please. Well, I grew up on a
farm in Woodbury, Connecticut, and it was a
general purpose and dairy farm. And I first went to
college to become a butter dairy farmer. And this
was at the University of Connecticut in Storrs,
Connecticut. Where? Storrs. Spell that.
S-T-O-R-R-S. And while there, my interests
turned to food processing. And my first degree,
BS, was in dairy production as well as dairy
manufacturing. When did you get this degree? This
was in 1954. When did you finish house food? 1949. I
spent a year in between dairy farming. I then went
on to Iowa State College at the time. Before you go
on, how far was this part of Connecticut from New
York City? This was about 100 miles, and that was a
long way. 100 miles east? Yeah, northeast. This
was in the southern part of Litchfield County at
the Berkshire foothills. So there are still
agricultural and dairy interests in this part of
Connecticut? Very little now. There probably
aren't more than 100 or 150 farms left. And those
are dairy farms. And there is a lot of truck
gardening and also tobacco gardening.
Shade-grown tobacco for
cigar wrappings and binders is a very major
industry. The profitability is such that they've
been able to continue to use land for that.
OK, you finished that degree in 1954, and then you
went to Iowa State. Iowa State. At Ames. At Ames.
Tell me about that. Well, the way I got there was
that in my senior year at Connecticut, I was on a
dairy products judging team. And we were pretty
good. We took first place in the eastern states
dairy products judging meet in Springfield,
Massachusetts, and then went on to the national
meeting, which was held at Boston that year. And
there was a fellowship given to members of each of
the top three teams. And that was my ticket to Iowa
State.
I studied in the dairy manufacturing building, as
they call it there. Actually, my degree was in food
technology. At that time, no one quite knew what a
food technologist was. But they were starting to
identify that as a separate discipline.
I was there for just about a year. finished my
masters and then went to the University of
Wisconsin at Madison. There I did my PhD in food
technology, working primarily on canned
vegetable and canned fruit problems. I finished
that degree in 1958. It also was in food
technology.
After that, I went to Work for the Quaker Oats
Company at the John Stewart Research
Laboratories in Barrington, Illinois. Spell
that. Barrington, B-A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N.
And Quaker, of course, everybody recognizes the
little Quaker man in the oatmeal box. But it was a
diversified company. It had many, many product
lines. It was the largest miller of not only oats,
but also of barley and dry corn products, such as
white corn grits, yellow corn meal. They
developed a process for making masa harina,
M-A-S-A, harina, H-A-R-I-N-A, which is the lime
treated corn that tortillas are made from. This
was really the first convenience type of Mexican
food that had been developed, and so the company
had many interests. I was in the food, in the bakery
mixes group for the first three years, and because
I had had considerable experience and exposure to
canning. When I worked on canned fruits and
vegetables in my PhD, I then transferred over to
work on pet foods. At that time, the U.S. pet foods
industry was probably about $800 million a year
volume, and Quaker had... about $60 million of the
sales. It was the largest seller of pet foods.
There were very, very many small companies in the
area. Those were very exciting years because it
was a chance to pull many things together. One of
the things that I did was organize the research
program at Quaker Oats I started with a staff of
two, and 12 years later had a staff of 32 people. We
developed numerous products, expanded
the U.S. product line from five products to about
30 in that period, developed processes that
allowed the company to enter other markets put up
plants in Holland,
England, Australia, and also expand the line, the
cattle ration and Puss in Boots lines in Canada.
During that 12-year period, the sales of pet foods
rose from about $60 million to close to $280
million. Uh, so it was very exciting period. Uh,
this was still at Barrington, Illinois, still at
Barrington, Illinois. Um, the pet foods industry
was growing about twice as fast or nearly three
times as fast as, uh, as grocery products
industry. And there was the, uh, uh, leader in
development of new types of, and application of
new types of technologies such as continuous
retorts, development of semi-moist pet foods
which are preserved by controlling the water
activity.
In other words, by use of high osmotic pressure,
this means sugar, salt, and as well as pH control.
Since then, quite a few products have been
developed and marketed, but we were pioneers at
the time. What was the reason for this boom in pet
food during this period? Well, there were several
reasons. The world was going through a rather
affluent stage. Much
of Europe had been rebuilt. After the war,
business conditions were pretty good, and there
were something like about 25 million dogs at the
time in the U.S., and about the same number of cats,
probably about 22 million cats. And people were
becoming conscious about their pets, and they
were starting to treat them as... well, as
surrogate children. In some cases, even taking
better care of them than with their own kids. Of
course, when you are working with pet food, you are
in an area of food technology, which is a cross
between, say, human food science and animal
feeding science. You're
products are sold in grocery stores.
And therefore, they have to be attractive and
pleasant in appearance and in odor when they're
brought into the household. On the other hand, in
the 50 states, the regulations and requirements
are set by the respective state feed control
officials. So when you are working on pet foods,
You have to abide by these various state laws as
well as also take full responsibility for the
nutrition of the animal. This is one thing that we
aren't yet doing in food. We give people free
choice, but when you have a pet and it relies
entirely on you for its sustenance, someone has to
worry about its nutrition.
Pets do go through a life cycle, and there are
different nutrition needs from, say, puppyhood
through growth, reproduction, and then on into
the older ages.
You do get a very good overview of nutrition in
application when you work in the pet food area. You
worked in that from 58 to 70? From 58 to about 1971.
At that time, I
had been, no, let's see, I worked in pet foods from
61 to about 71.
At that time, I,
let me shut that off. Well, I don't want to
answer that. You can just wait. You said you worked
in the Pet Food Division from 61 to 71. Right. At
that time, I became interested in other areas. And
I found that the world really wasn't giving or
recognizing the pet food technologists as being
part of the food science area. And by this time, I
had amassed quite a large staff and realized that
after
this, most of my future would be in management and
administration. So I took a two-year course in the
Graduate School of Business at the University of
Chicago. in their executive program. This was a
fixed curriculum program, which led to an MBA in
two years. And
it was a type of course where you still
continued your job full time.
One week went to two classes, all day classes on
Friday on the company's time and next week went all
day Saturday on your own time. There were two
sessions or two groups that went simultaneously
through the program and they would alternate
Fridays and Saturdays. It took about 30 hours a
week. to take the course on top of your regular
program. So it was just like signing up for law
school, things like that.
This is 1970.
I completed the Master's of Business
Administration in 1972.
In 1971,
the company divisionalized.
The sales of the company had grown from something
like about $90 million a year to well over a billion
and a half.
in the previous 15 years, and there were many new
groups organized, and I took on the position of
Manager of Scientific Services. This was running
the services in common for the various research
programs at the Barrington Laboratories.
I had 65 people at the time, and we ran the
analytical laboratory, microbiology,
biochemistry research,
statistics, operations research, and data
processing. These were programs that served not
only the people in the research laboratories, but
also at the various plants as the need arose. I held
that position until 1977, at which time I came to
Texas A&M University. What was the circumstances
of your coming here?
The Food Protein Research and Development Center
had lost its associate director, Dr. Carl Kater,
C-A-T-E-R, the previous October. It's Carl with a
C or a K. C-A-R-L.
I believe it was in October. I'm sorry, it was the
previous November. in an airplane accident. He
was flying his private plane to a meeting in
Peoria, Illinois, and had an accident. The
position was open, and so I came on board as an
associate director of research, realizing at the
time that this was a training position for
becoming director since the then director, Dr.
Carl Mattil, that's K-A-R-L, Mattil,
M-A-T-T-I-L,
had had a heart attack several years earlier and
was working part time.
He didn't look very good at the time of the
interview. Um, and, uh, but I still thought he
probably would, um, uh, would be active for
another year or two. Uh, however, when I got here,
um, he had, had become quite disabled and, uh, uh,
went in the hospital shortly thereafter and died,
uh, not from a heart attack, but from, um,
pancreatic cancer, which is a very painful way to
go. I really spent very little time with Dr. Mattil
because of the circumstances. And so
essentially, here I was having two positions to
fill. And I had just arrived from industry.
Carl Mattil died in October of 1977.
There were plans at the time on the drawing board
for developing or building a new building.
Actually, it was a program to move the Food Protein
Research and Development Center out of Central
Campus.
The original building had been donated to the
university by the Texas Cotton Seed Processors
Committee back in the mid-1940s. And
it had a solvent extraction plant along with it,
and this was right next to the boiler house or the
boiler plant in Central Campus. Of course, as the
university had grown, it had had to expand its
utilities, including the steam generation and
water chilling facilities, and it badly needed
that space to expand the central power plant. Our
building was fairly old and inadequate at the
time, and so an exchange was made. They built new
buildings for us, the research oil mill out at the
Texas A&M Research Annex at West Highway 21 in
Bryan. That's the site of the former Bryan Air
Force Base. And the new Food Protein Research and
Development main building was built in West
Campus, just west of the railroad tracks, beyond
Wellborn Road and the south of University Avenue,
just south of the agricultural engineering
shops. Um, as I was mentioning earlier, the plans
were there, but, uh, but they weren't finalized.
And so one of my first duties was to, uh, finalize
the, uh, list of requirements. And, um, and then
work with the architect in designing the
building. Of course, making various compromises
since everyone's operating under a budget.
We moved first into the research oil mill in the
summer of 1979.
We had shut down some of the research program,
particularly the salmon extraction plant. I
moved that in the summer of 1979, and then
moved the rest of the
equipment out in the summer of 1980, as well as
moving some equipment to the new Food Protein
Research and Development Center building. and
the laboratories. At that time, the center
operated
in four locations. I had moved the main office to
the Oilseed
Products Building, which was at the corner of
Ireland and Ross. Ireland and Ross Streets. The
main, let's see, the newer laboratories were in
the O&ET building. Dr. K.C. Rhee, that's K-H-E-E,
Choon, C-H-O-O-N, Rhee, capital R-H-E-E, had
laboratories in the agronomy field laboratory.
near the veterinary school. And we also had a fish
protein concentrate plant at the Texas A&M
Research Annex. Through our moving, we
consolidated the facilities into two locations,
the research oil mill at the Texas A&M Research
Extension Center and the main building on campus.
What was the cost of this building? The total
building program was about $3.2 million. This was
more than we had anticipated. Approximately
$400,000
was spent on the two Butler-type buildings at the a
research oil mill. There's about 12,000 square
feet there, about 1,500 in the solvent extraction
plant,
and 10,500 in the seed
cleaning and processing building. The main
building on campus
has 28,000 square feet, and it costs about $2.6
million. Funds for these facilities came from the
university permanent fund, and another $200,000
approximately was contributed by the Texas
Engineering Experiment Station from their
operating budget. This was for moving costs,
certain components which we needed because we now
had split our power plant in two locations.
We did most of the finishing
of the research formula ourselves. This included
painting, putting in benches, actually
refinishing benches, putting in tile floors, of
course, dismantling the old equipment, moving
it. building steel platforms. In many cases, we
had to remodel the equipment as we reinstall it.
Industry was quite helpful. To this point, we've
received about $650,000 worth of equipment and
services as either straight donations or long
term loans of equipment. which is the same as the
donations as we see it.
In total, I would say we currently have a
replacement value of about $6.5 million for our
facilities.
We held a industry open house and dedication
program on the 14th and 15th of April, 1981, to
commemorate
the establishment of these new facilities. And at
that time, through the action of the Board of
Regents, the main building was named Cater Matil
Hall in honor of Dr. Carl Mattel and Carl Cater, who
were the founders of the Food Protein Research and
Development Center. How many researchers do you
have working here?
We have 10 principal investigators. These are
people who lead programs.
In most cases, they are PhDs. I'd say only two of
them are not. And then they have other advanced
degree people working for them. So we have a total
of about 15 advanced degree people in the program.
These researchers, some of these also teach? Or
these are strictly research people? They teach,
but the center is a full-time research program.
We're not an academic group in that we give courses
as such or can give degrees. Our people have
cross-appointments in other departments. Well,
soil and crop sciences is probably the major one.
Dr. Ki-Chun Ri, who is now my associate director of
research, has several appointments. He has an
appointment to the graduate school through them
and can lead graduate students. He also is a
lecturer, presents two courses under Sonic Crop
Sciences. Dr. Larry Johnson presents a course a
year and is also appointed through the graduate
school.
I'm also a professor in soil and crop sciences and
have an appointment in the graduate school. Then
we have two people who have cross-appointments in
agricultural engineering, Dr. Jose Aguilera.
who teaches a course in food packaging. Did you
spell that last? Aguilera, A-G-U-I-L-E-R-A.
And he leads graduate students. And the other
person is Dr. Katie Engler. That's C-A-D-Y
Engler, E-N-G-L-E-R. Katie is half-time
graduate. on our program as a half-time teaching
appointment in agricultural engineering. I
believe he teaches through a year, probably three
different courses, and also leads several
graduate students. Currently, we have about 42
people, nine of whom are associated with the
program here. Nine of them are graduate students.
In many cases, they are They are here on their own
money rather than on half-time assistantships.
We have three visiting scientists, one from
Argentina, two from Korea. And then, of course, we
have our secretarial and
hourly people that make up the difference So that
40, what was that? It's about 42 staff members plus
the three visiting scientists. So 45 would be a
better number.
All right. What are some of the research projects
that have recently been completed in food
protein?
The one that probably brought the most attention
The most international attention to the center
was the development of a process for extracting
protein from coconuts and making protein liquid
and dry milk products for the Philippine
government. This was a project that was initiated
after Dr. Matil toured the world for the AID
program. in the agency for international
development. The project was started in the early
70s. It took about three or four years to complete.
And we then sent one of our staff members to the
Philippines for a two-year period to teach the
local people, well, to oversee construction of a
pilot plant and to train local staff. The question
is, how do you work with coconuts at college
station? It was simple. They just would fly them in
by plane from the Caribbean
several times a month. Coconuts are fairly
stable, and you can keep them refrigerated. Dr.
Hagenmeyer, Hagen, H-A-G-E-N-M-E-I-R,
then stayed on with the Philippine Coconut
Authority.
has since become a permanent member of their
staff. The Philippine government has decided to
build a production plant that faces his early and
later process development work. Here at
the center, we're working on a number of
interesting projects. We have taken the lead in
the development processes and food uses for clam
is cottonseed. Normally cottonseed has or
contains
Gossypol pigment. Gossypol, G-O-S-S-Y-P-O-L.
Pigment which is laid down in small structures
called glands. This is throughout the plant and
also in the seed. And
The gossip ball is toxic to all monogastric
animals. Cattle can handle it well, but chickens,
swine, horses, and humans, of course, cannot. It
is possible to detoxify the gossip ball by high
temperature heating, but this binds it to the
lysine and really diminishes the food value of the
seed. A new variety of cotton seed was discovered
twenty years ago, and its development has
continued. Basically, it's a genetically
glandless variety. The seed just doesn't have the
gland either the glands or the pigments. And as
such, you now have a source of food protein, which
is light-colored, very bland, much bland than
soybeans, and can be used as a food source. This
should be of particular interest in the world's
developing countries because for the most part,
The
cultivation of soybeans is limited in the
equatorial countries, which tend to be your
famine-built countries. However, cotton is
grown in these locations, and it could be a, well,
the use of the seed as food would present a, another
crop or return for the same agricultural effort
for the same tillage and the same costs of
production. The protein quality of glandless
cottonseed is very good. It's as good or better
than soybeans, which would make it probably the
world's second best food protein source after
rapeseed. However, rapeseed is a northern-grown
crop. and there still are problems on detoxifying
for food use. So I would say Glynis cottonseed,
practically speaking, is a very excellent
resource for developing countries.
We have developed techniques for complete
de-hulling and separating of Glynis cottonseed.
uh, for roasting the seed, uh, to be used as nut
replacements, uh, for making, uh, uh, defatted
flowers, protein concentrates, and isolates,
and isolates, I-S-O-L-A-T-E-S. Uh, these are,
uh, different degrees of purity of protein.
Normally with most cotton seeds, if you, well,
with most seeds, once you get the hull off and the
oil out, Uh, the residue will analyze about 50%
protein. You would take about 5%. Um,
if you then, this would be a flower. Uh, if you then
were to wash the sugars, uh, out of the seed or out of
say ground seed, uh, you would raise the protein
count to about 70% and this would be the
concentrate. If you then were to further purify
the protein, such as by solubilizing in alkali and
then re-precipitating with acid, you would have a
isolate,
which would be about 90% protein. These are the
traditional ways of making various types of food
proteins. We have gone beyond this. by
fractionating the isolates into three
fractions. The whey proteins, the storage and
non-storage proteins, and each fraction has a
different characteristic, in some cases a
somewhat different nutritional value. The
whey proteins are are very high quality
nutrition-wise and are very similar to the whey
proteins of milk, for example, or say the whey that
results from making cheese. They would be
nutritionally probably the equivalent of egg
protein, which is considered to be the highest
quality protein readily available for people.
Cotton seed has, in the storage protein, has a
fraction that is acid soluble. In other words, you
could make fortified orange
juices, soda pop type products, things of this
nature. So there's a lot of versatility. But what
we have done with
cotton seed, we have done with most of the other
oilseeds. This includes soybeans,
peanuts, sunflower. In fact, in sunflower we have
learned how to
keep the chlorogenic acid, which is one of the
compounds or components from turning green
during the preparation of isolates. As a result,
you have a white isolate that can be used in many
food products. Dr. Aguilera has worked on
processing and utilization of lupin. This is
because of his earlier interest. He's a native
Chilean who has received his last two degrees at US
universities. And lupin is used as a food product
in the L-U-P-I-N-A. It is used as a food source in
Chile, and its interest is increasing in other
countries. What is the state that it comes in?
Well, it's a seed. It's something like a flat pea,
and there are various types. The traditional
types do have,
well, they have better components,
thioglycosinolates, which are, which are toxic
and normally have to be soaked or leached out
before processing. However, there are newer
varieties, which are called the sweet-type
lupins, where
these components have been bred out of the plant.
This
results in a really useful food ingredient. We're
pioneering other areas at the center. One of the
processes has been this extraction process
originally developed for the production of food
protein from coconuts. In the wet coconut meat,
protein is present only at about the 4% level, and
there is a lot of fiber. that
occurs with the protein. The problem there is how
to extract this dilute amount of protein and
concentrate it. A wet or aqueous extraction
process was developed. This process primarily
uses dairy type centrifuges for separating the
oil from the protein, as well as various sieves and
and decanters in the watering devices. Finally,
you end up with a concentrated protein solution,
which is dried on a spray dryer. This process has
since been adapted to other oil seeds, such as
soybeans, peanuts, sesame, and other products.
And it shows considerable promise for the future
because it is a way of extracting oil without using
solvents. Most of the, well, I'd say all of the U.S.
soy beans that are processed are extracted with
hexane. And much of the other oil seeds are also
similarly processed. Well, hexane is made from,
Petroleum hexane, H-E-X-A-N-E. It's derived
from the cracking of petroleum.
It's become expensive. It costs probably about
$1.60 to $2 a gallon, depending upon the volume
that you buy it in. It's scarce, and it's more
flammable or more combustible than gasoline. So
one has to be very careful when you're going to sell
an extraction plant. There also has been concerns
about the residual petroleum, about petroleum
residues in food products such as hexane
extracted food flowers. All these problems are
solved when you use aqueous extraction
processing. The center also has pioneered in the
application of industrial membranes. This is
reverse osmosis and ultrafiltration to
processing of proteins and other agricultural
extractives.
The ultrafiltration membranes are used to
separate or sieve out, if you want to say proteins
from the other soluble and the reverse osmosis is
used to remove the water from the sugars and
soluble salts and things of that nature. Through
this technique, you not only recover, through a
combination of these techniques, you not only
recover more soluble protein, but you also can get
75% of your water back for recycling. In other
words, for reuse in the next batch process.
Originally, the center got into the program
to apply industrial membranes as pollution
control devices, but later found that these
techniques were useful. uh processing
technologies and from there we from there on we
went on to develop processes specifically using
membranes we currently are working on processes
using stage membranes in other words these
membranes being for practical purposes sieves
can be staged in series or you know call them
stacked so that you do so you can't take separate
proteins into fractions. Most oilseeds have four
or more fractions of proteins, and we feel that we
can separate these fractions commercially and at
low cost, and therefore would have new type of food
ingredients available to us.
In the processing of agricultural crops,
there really are two industries.
The first is the industry that breaks the crops or
extracts it, mills it into the ingredient, and
then the grocery products industry, or say the
institutional products industry, which then
compounds these into products that appear on the
grocery shelf or are shipped to McDonald's as
ready mixes or to bakeries. We have taken the
position that we'll work on the earlier phases
that of developing new ingredients from
agricultural crops rather than compete with the
food.